# Our Approach to Writing CSS

We use [SCSS](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/file.SCSS_FOR_SASS_USERS.html) to write our CSS. All components should keep their CSS local to their own component (e.g. use `Button/styles.scss` next to `Button/index.js`). Here are a few guidelines for writing scalable CSS:

- **Use component names for class names:** if your component is `SearchResult`, its class name should be `.SearchResult`. Any children component should start with the component name, e.g. `.SearchResult-listItem`, etc. Any utility classes like `enabled` or `disabled` should be written with two dashes, e.g.: `.SearchResult-textInput--enabled`.
- **Always use variables for colors, margins, and sizes**: these should be app-wide variables whenever possible to keep them shared between components; when we change the link color it should change everywhere.
- **Do not import directly from `~core/`**: each app has its own `mixins.scss`, `vars.scss`, etc. Use `~amo/css/mixins.scss` instead of `~core/css/mixins.scss`. Each app extends core but be careful of changing things in core; it's best to put overrides in an app's mixin.
- **Use `px` (pixels) for size instead of `em`, `rem`, etc.**: pixel sizes work fine and keeps things consistent. If you want to scale something with screen size `%` (percent) values are okay.
- **Keep CSS local to the component:** don't use `App.scss` or `SearchPage/styles.scss` to style a button component on a `SearchPage` component. Instead create options that can be passed to differently style the button from the `SearchPage` component.
- **Don't nest selectors; use more specific class names instead**: prefer `<ul className="List"><li className="List-item"></li></ul>` and the selector `.List-item` over `.List li`. This seems verbose but it prevents nesting bugs and confusion as the codebase grows. It also makes it easier to scan CSS rules at a glance.
- **Don't use the [parent selector](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/file.SASS_REFERENCE.html#Referencing_Parent_Selectors_____parent-selector), except for pseudo-classes**: prefer full class names, it is easier to find. Using `&` for pseudo-class such as `:hover`, `:active`, etc. is allowed though.
- **When overrides make sense, keep them in the parent component and use CSS nesting:** this is the only time we use nesting instead of specifically-named class selectors. There are a few cases where tiny adjustments may be made to `margin`, etc. for a child component in only one context. If modifying the `margin` of `Result` inside `SearchResultList`, it is appropriate to declare `.SearchResultList .Result` in `SearchResultList/styles.scss`.
